The mouth of this hollow was at the bottom of a great rock, where, by
mere accident (I would say, if I did not see abundant reason to ascribe
all such things now to Providence), I was cutting down some thick
branches of trees to make charcoal; and before I go on I must observe the
reason of my making this charcoal, which was this—I was afraid of making
a smoke about my habitation, as I said before; and yet I could not live
there without baking my bread, cooking my meat, &c.; so I contrived to
burn some wood here, as I had seen done in England, under turf, till it
became chark or dry coal: and then putting the fire out, I preserved the
coal to carry home, and perform the other services for which fire was
wanting, without danger of smoke.  But this is by-the-bye.  While I was
cutting down some wood here, I perceived that, behind a very thick branch
of low brushwood or underwood, there was a kind of hollow place: I was
curious to look in it; and getting with difficulty into the mouth of it,
I found it was pretty large, that is to say, sufficient for me to stand
upright in it, and perhaps another with me: but I must confess to you
that I made more haste out than I did in, when looking farther into the
place, and which was perfectly dark, I saw two broad shining eyes of some
creature, whether devil or man I knew not, which twinkled like two stars;
the dim light from the cave’s mouth shining directly in, and making the
reflection.  However, after some pause I recovered myself, and began to
call myself a thousand fools, and to think that he that was afraid to see
the devil was not fit to live twenty years in an island all alone; and
that I might well think there was nothing in this cave that was more
frightful than myself.  Upon this, plucking up my courage, I took up a
firebrand, and in I rushed again, with the stick flaming in my hand: I
had not gone three steps in before I was almost as frightened as before;
for I heard a very loud sigh, like that of a man in some pain, and it was
followed by a broken noise, as of words half expressed, and then a deep
sigh again.  I stepped back, and was indeed struck with such a surprise
that it put me into a cold sweat, and if I had had a hat on my head, I
will not answer for it that my hair might not have lifted it off.  But
still plucking up my spirits as well as I could, and encouraging myself a
little with considering that the power and presence of God was
everywhere, and was able to protect me, I stepped forward again, and by
the light of the firebrand, holding it up a little over my head, I saw
lying on the ground a monstrous, frightful old he-goat, just making his
will, as we say, and gasping for life, and, dying, indeed, of mere old
age.  I stirred him a little to see if I could get him out, and he
essayed to get up, but was not able to raise himself; and I thought with
myself he might even lie there—for if he had frightened me, so he would
certainly fright any of the savages, if any of them should be so hardy as
to come in there while he had any life in him.

I was now recovered from my surprise, and began to look round me, when I
found the cave was but very small—that is to say, it might be about
twelve feet over, but in no manner of shape, neither round nor square, no
hands having ever been employed in making it but those of mere Nature.  I
observed also that there was a place at the farther side of it that went
in further, but was so low that it required me to creep upon my hands and
knees to go into it, and whither it went I knew not; so, having no
candle, I gave it over for that time, but resolved to go again the next
day provided with candles and a tinder-box, which I had made of the lock
of one of the muskets, with some wildfire in the pan.

Accordingly, the next day I came provided with six large candles of my
own making (for I made very good candles now of goat’s tallow, but was
hard set for candle-wick, using sometimes rags or rope-yarn, and
sometimes the dried rind of a weed like nettles); and going into this low
place I was obliged to creep upon all-fours as I have said, almost ten
yards—which, by the way, I thought was a venture bold enough, considering
that I knew not how far it might go, nor what was beyond it.  When I had
got through the strait, I found the roof rose higher up, I believe near
twenty feet; but never was such a glorious sight seen in the island, I
daresay, as it was to look round the sides and roof of this vault or
cave—the wall reflected a hundred thousand lights to me from my two
candles.  What it was in the rock—whether diamonds or any other precious
stones, or gold which I rather supposed it to be—I knew not.  The place I
was in was a most delightful cavity, or grotto, though perfectly dark;
the floor was dry and level, and had a sort of a small loose gravel upon
it, so that there was no nauseous or venomous creature to be seen,
neither was there any damp or wet on the sides or roof.  The only
difficulty in it was the entrance—which, however, as it was a place of
security, and such a retreat as I wanted; I thought was a convenience; so
that I was really rejoiced at the discovery, and resolved, without any
delay, to bring some of those things which I was most anxious about to
this place: particularly, I resolved to bring hither my magazine of
powder, and all my spare arms—viz. two fowling-pieces—for I had three in
all—and three muskets—for of them I had eight in all; so I kept in my
castle only five, which stood ready mounted like pieces of cannon on my
outmost fence, and were ready also to take out upon any expedition.  Upon
this occasion of removing my ammunition I happened to open the barrel of
powder which I took up out of the sea, and which had been wet, and I
found that the water had penetrated about three or four inches into the
powder on every side, which caking and growing hard, had preserved the
inside like a kernel in the shell, so that I had near sixty pounds of
very good powder in the centre of the cask.  This was a very agreeable
discovery to me at that time; so I carried all away thither, never
keeping above two or three pounds of powder with me in my castle, for
fear of a surprise of any kind; I also carried thither all the lead I had
left for bullets.

I fancied myself now like one of the ancient giants who were said to live
in caves and holes in the rocks, where none could come at them; for I
persuaded myself, while I was here, that if five hundred savages were to
hunt me, they could never find me out—or if they did, they would not
venture to attack me here.  The old goat whom I found expiring died in
the mouth of the cave the next day after I made this discovery; and I
found it much easier to dig a great hole there, and throw him in and
cover him with earth, than to drag him out; so I interred him there, to
prevent offence to my nose.

