As he discovered us, so did the rest of the inhabitants belonging to the
huts about him, and all crowded together, looking at us at a distance, a
little bottom, in which the brook ran, lying between us; the white man, and
all the rest, as he told us afterwards, not knowing well whether they
should stay or run away. However, it presently came into my thoughts, that
if there were white men among them, it would be much easier to make them
understand what we meant as to peace or war, than we found it with others;
so tying a piece of white rag to the end of a stick, we sent two negroes
with it to the bank of the water, carrying the pole up as high as they
could; it was presently understood, and two of their men and the white man
came to the shore on the other side.

However, as the white man spoke no Portuguese, they could understand
nothing of one another but by signs; but our men made the white man
understand that they had white men with them too, at which they said the
white man laughed. However, to be short, our men came back, and told us
they were all good friends, and in about an hour four of our men, two
negroes, and the black prince, went to the river-side, where the white man
came to them.

They had not been half a quarter of an hour, but a negro came running to
me, and told me the white man was Inglese, as he called him; upon which I
ran back, eagerly enough, you may be sure, with him, and found, as he said,
that he was an Englishman; upon which he embraced me very passionately, the
tears running down his face. The first surprise of his seeing us was over
before we came, but any one may conceive it by the brief account he gave us
afterwards of his very unhappy circumstances, and of so unexpected a
deliverance, such as perhaps never happened to any man in the world, for it
was a million to one odds that ever he could have been relieved; nothing
but an adventure that never was heard or read of before could have suited
his case, unless Heaven, by some miracle that never was to be expected, had
acted for him.

He appeared to be a gentleman, not an ordinary-bred fellow, seaman, or
labouring man; this showed itself in his behaviour in the first moment of
our conversing with him, and in spite of all the disadvantages of his
miserable circumstances.

He was a middle-aged man, not above thirty-seven or thirty-eight, though
his beard was grown exceedingly long, and the hair of his head and face
strangely covered him to the middle of his back and breast; he was white,
and his skin very fine, though discoloured, and in some places blistered,
and covered with a brown blackish substance, scurfy, scaly, and hard, which
was the effect of the scorching heat of the sun; he was stark naked, and
had been so, as he told us, upwards of two years.

He was so exceedingly transported at our meeting with him, that he could
scarce enter into any discourse at all with us that day; and when he could
get away from us for a little, we saw him walking alone, and showing all
the most extravagant tokens of an ungovernable joy; and even afterwards he
was never without tears in his eyes for several days, upon the least word
spoken by us of his circumstances, or by him of his deliverance.

We found his behaviour the most courteous and endearing I ever saw in any
man whatever, and most evident tokens of a mannerly, well-bred person
appeared in all things he did or said, and our people were exceedingly
taken with him. He was a scholar and a mathematician; he could not speak
Portuguese indeed, but he spoke Latin to our surgeon, French to another of
our men, and Italian to a third.

He had no leisure in his thoughts to ask us whence we came, whither we were
going, or who we were; but would have it always as an answer to himself,
that to be sure, wherever we were a-going, we came from Heaven, and were
sent on purpose to save him from the most wretched condition that ever man
was reduced to.

Our men pitching their camp on the bank of a little river opposite to him,
he began to inquire what store of provisions we had, and how we proposed to
be supplied. When he found that our store was but small, he said he would
talk with the natives, and we should have provisions enough; for he said
they were the most courteous, good-natured part of the inhabitants in all
that part of the country, as we might suppose by his living so safe among
them.

The first things this gentleman did for us were indeed of the greatest
consequence to us; for, first, he perfectly informed us where we were, and
which was the properest course for us to steer; secondly, he put us in the
way how to furnish ourselves effectually with provisions; and thirdly, he
was our complete interpreter and peacemaker with all the natives, who now
began to be very numerous about us, and who were a more fierce and politic
people than those we had met with before; not so easily terrified with our
arms as those, and not so ignorant as to give their provisions and corn for
our little toys, such as, I said before, our artificer made; but as they
had frequently traded and conversed with the Europeans on the coast, or
with other negro nations that had traded and been concerned with them, they
were the less ignorant and the less fearful, and consequently nothing was
to be had from them but by exchange for such things as they liked.

This I say of the negro natives, which we soon came among; but as to these
poor people that he lived among, they were not much acquainted with things,
being at the distance of above 300 miles from the coast; only that they
found elephants' teeth upon the hills to the north, which they took and
carried about sixty or seventy miles south, where other trading negroes
usually met them, and gave them beads, glass, shells, and cowries, for
them, such as the English and Dutch and other traders furnish them with
from Europe.


