Its now three years since I ended the Treatise which contains all these
things, and that I began to review it, to send it afterwards to the
Presse, when I understood, that persons to whom I submit, and whose
authority can no lesse command my actions, then my own Reason doth my
thoughts, had disapproved an opinion in Physicks, published a little
before by another; of which I will not say that I was, but that indeed I
had observed nothing therein, before their censure, which I could have
imagined prejudiciall either to Religion or the State; or consequently,
which might have hindred me from writing the same, had my Reason
perswaded mee thereto. And this made me fear, lest in the same manner
there might be found some one amongst mine, in which I might have been
mistaken; notwithstanding the great care I always had to admit no new
ones into my belief, of which I had not most certain demonstrations; and
not to write such as might turn to the disadvantage of any body. Which
was sufficient to oblige me to change my resolution of publishing them.
For although the reasons for which I had first of all taken it, were
very strong; yet my inclination, which alwayes made me hate the trade of
Book-making, presently found me out others enough to excuse my self from
it. And these reasons on the one and other side are such, that I am not
only somewhat concern'd to speak them; but happily the Publick also to
know them.

I never did much esteem those things which proceeded from mine own
brain; and so long as I have gathered no other fruits from the Method I
use, but onely that I have satisfied my self in some difficulties which
belong to speculative Sciences, or at least endeavoured to regulate my
Manners by the reasons it taught me, I thought my self not obliged to
write any thing of them. For, as for what concerns Manners, every one
abounds so much in his own sense, That we may finde as many Reformers as
heads, were it permitted to others, besides those whom God hath
established as Soveraigns over his people, or at least, to whom he hath
dispensed grace and zeal enough to be Prophets, to undertake the change
of any thing therein. And although my Speculations did very much please
me, I did beleeve that other men also had some, which perhaps pleas'd
them more. But as soon as I had acquired some generall notions touching
naturall Philosophy, and beginning to prove them in divers particular
difficulties, I observed how far they might lead a man, and how far
different they were from the principles which to this day are in use; I
judg'd, that I could not keep them hid without highly sinning against
the Law, which obligeth us to procure, as much as in us lies, the
general good of all men. For they made it appear to me, that it was
possible to attain to points of knowledge, which may be very profitable
for this life: and that in stead of this speculative Philosophy which is
taught in the Schools, we might finde out a practicall one, by which
knowing the force and workings of Fire, Water, Air, of the Starrs, of
the Heavens, and of all other Bodies which environ us, distinctly, as we
know the several trades of our Handicrafts, we might in the same manner
employ them to all uses to which they are fit, and so become masters and
possessours of Nature. Which is not onely to be desired for the
invention of very many expedients of Arts, which without trouble might
make us enjoy the fruits of the earth, and all the conveniences which
are to be found therein: But chiefly also for the preservation of
health, which (without doubt) is the first good, and the foundation of
all other good things in this life. For even the minde depends so much
on the temper and disposition of the organs of the body, that if it be
possible to finde any way of making men in the generall wiser, and more
able then formerly they were, I beleeve it ought to be sought in
Physick. True it is, that which is now in use contains but few things,
whose benefit is very remarkable: But (without any designe of slighting
of it) I assure my self, there is none, even of their own profession,
but will consent, that whatsoever is known therein, is almost nothing in
companion of what remains to be known. And that we might be freed from
very many diseases, aswell of the body as of the mind, and even also
perhaps from the weaknesses of old age, had we but knowledge enough of
their Causes, and of all the Remedies wherewith Nature hath furnished
us. Now having a designe to employ all my life in the enquiry of so
necessary a Science; and having found a way, the following of which me
thinks might infallibly lead us to it, unless we be hindred by the
shortness of life, or by defect of experiments. I judg'd that there was
no better Remedie against those two impediments, but faithfully to
communicate to the publique, all that little I should discover, and to
invite all good Wits to endevour to advance farther in contributing
every one, according to his inclination and power, to those Experiments
which are to be made, and communicating also to the publique all the
things they should learn; so that the last, beginning where the
precedent ended, and so joyning the lives and labors of many in one, we
might all together advance further then any particular Man could do.


