I should be glad to pursue this Discourse, and shew you the whole Series
of the following Truths, which I have drawn from the former: But because
for this purpose, it were now necessary for me to treat of severall
questions, which are controverted by the learned, with whom I have no
desire to imbroil my self, I beleeve it better for me to abstain from
it; and so in generall onely to discover what they are, that I may leave
the wisest to judge whether it were profitable to inform the publick
more particularly of them. I alwayes remained constant to my resolution,
to suppose no other Principle but that which I now made use of, for the
demonstration of the Existence of God, and of the Soul; and to receive
nothing for true, which did not seem to me more clear and more certain
then the demonstrations of Geometry had formerly done. And yet I dare
say, that I have not onely found out the means to satisfie my self, in a
short time, concerning all the principall difficulties which are usually
treated in Philosophy. But that also _I_ have observed certain Laws
which God hath so established in Nature, and of which he hath imprinted
such notions in our Souls, that when we shall have made sufficient
reflections upon them we cannot doubt but that they are exactly observed
in whatsoever either is, or is done in the World. Then considering the
connexion of these Laws, me thinks, I have discovercd divers Truths,
more usefull and important then whatever _I_ learn'd before, or ever
hop'd to learn.

But because _I_ have endeavoured to lay open the principall of them in a
Treatise, which some considerations hinder me from publishing; _I_ can
no way better make them known, then by relating summarily what it
contains.

I had a designe to comprehend all what I thought _I_ knew, before _I_
would write it, touching the nature of material things. But even as
Painters, not being able equally well to represent upon a _flat_ all the
severall facies of a solid body, chuse the principall of them, which
they place towards the light; and shadowing the others, make them appear
no more then they do to our sight: So, fearing lest _I_ should not bring
into this Discourse all which was in my thoughts, _I_ onely undertook to
set forth at large my conceptions touching the light; and upon that
occasion to add somewhat of the Sun, and of the fix'd Stars, by reason
that it proceeds almost all from thence; of the Heavens, because they
transmit it; of the Planets, of the Comets, and of the Earth, because
they cause it to reflect; and in particular, of all Bodies which are on
the earth, whether for that they are either coloured, or transparent, or
luminous; and last of all, of Man, because he is the Spectator thereof.
As also, in some manner to shadow out all these things, and that _I_
might the more freely speak what _I_ judg'd, without being obliged to
follow, or to refute the opinions which are received amongst the
Learned, _I_ resolved to leave all this world here to their disputes,
and to speak onely of what would happen in a new one, if God now created
some where in those imaginary spaces matter enough to compose it, and
that he diversly and without order agitated the severall parts of this
matter, so as to compose a Chaos of it as confused as the Poets could
feign one: and that afterwards he did nothing but lend his ordinary
concurrence to Nature, and leave her to work according to the Laws he
hath established.

Thus first of all _I_ described this Matter, and endevoured to
represent it such, that me thinks there is nothing in the world more
clear, or more intelligible, except what was beforesaid of God, and of
the Soul. For even _I_ expresly supposed that there was in it none of
those forms and qualities which are disputed in the Schools; nor
generally any thing but that the knowledge thereof was so naturall to
our understandings, that we could not even feigne to be ignorant of it.
Besides, I made known what the Laws of Nature were; and without
grounding my reasons on any other principles, but on the infinite
perfections of God, I did endeavour to demonstrate all those which might
be questioned, and to make them appear to be such, that although God had
created divers worlds, there could have been none where they were not
observed. Afterwards _I_ shewed how the greater part of the Matter of
this _Chaos_ ought, according to those Laws, to dispose and order it
self in a certain manner, which would make it like our Heavens: And how
some of these parts were to compose an Earth, and some Planets and
Commets, some others a Sun and fix'd Starrs. And here enlarging my self
on the subject of Light, _I_ at length explain'd what that light was,
which was to be in the Sun and Stars; and thence how it travers'd in an
instant the immense spaces of the Heavens, and how it reflected it self
from Planets and Commets towards the Earth. _I_ added also divers things
touching the substance, situation, the motions, and all the several
qualities of these heavens and these stars: So that _I_ thought _I_ had
said enough to make known, That there is nothing remarkable in those of
this world, which ought not, or at least could not appear altogether
like to these of that world which _I_ described.


