And for my part, I had undoubtedly been of the number of those latter,
had I never had but one Master, or had I not known the disputes which
have alwayes hapned amongst the most learned. For having learnt from
the very School, That one can imagin nothing so strange or incredible,
which had not been said by some one of the Philosophers; And having
since observ'd in my travails, That all those whose opinions are
contrary to ours, are not therefore barbarous or savage, but that many
use as much or more reason then we; and having consider'd how much one
Man with his own understanding, bred up from his childhood among the
French or the Dutch, becomes different from what he would be, had he
alwayes liv'd amongst the _Chineses_, or the _Cannibals_: And how even
in the fashion of our Clothes, the same thing which pleas'd ten years
since, and which perhaps wil please ten years hence, seems now to us
ridiculous and extravagant. So that it's much more Custome and Example
which perswades us, then any assured knowledg; and notwithstanding that
plurality of voices is a proof of no validity, in those truths which
are hard to be discovered; for that it's much more likely for one man
alone to have met with them, then a whole Nation; I could choose no Man
whose opinion was to be preferr'd before anothers: And I found my self
even constrain'd to undertake the conduct of my self.

But as a man that walks alone, and in the dark, I resolv'd to goe so
softly, and use so much circumspection in all things, that though I
advanc'd little, I would yet save my self from falling. Neither would I
begin quite to reject, some opinions, which formerly had crept into my
belief, without the consent of my reason, before I had employed time
enough to form the project of the work I undertook, and to seek the true
Method to bring me to the knowledg of all those things, of which my
understanding was capable.

I had a little studyed, being young, of the parts of Philosophy, Logick,
and of the Mathematicks, the Analysis of the Geometricians, and
_Algebra_: Three arts or sciences which seem'd to contribute somewhat
conducing to my designe: But examining them, I observ'd, That as for
Logick, its Sylogisms, and the greatest part of its other Rules, serve
rather to expound to another the things they know, or even as _Lullies_
art, to speak with judgment of the things we are ignorant of, then to
learn them. And although in effect it contain divers most true and good
precepts, yet there are so many others mixed amongst them, either
hurtfull or superfluous, That it's even as difficult to extract them, as
'tis to draw a _Diana_ or a _Mercury_ out of a lump of Marble, which is
not yet rough-hewn; as for the Analysis of the Ancients, and the
_Algebra_ of the Moderns; besides that, they extend only to matters very
abstract, and which seem to be of no use; The first being alwayes so
tyed to the consideration of figures, That it cannot exercise the
understanding, without very much tiring the imagination. And in the
latter they have so subjected themselves to certain Rules and cyphers,
that they have made a confus'd and obscure art which perplexeth the
minde, in stead of a Science to instruct it. For this reason, I thought
I ought to seek some other Method, which comprehending the advantages of
these, they might be exempt from their defects. And as the multitude of
Laws often furnisheth excuses for vice; so a State is fair better
polic'd, when having but a few, they are very strictly observ'd therein:
So, instead of the great many precepts whereof Logick is compos'd, I
thought these four following would be sufficient for me, if I took but a
firm and constant resolution not once to fail in the observation of
them.

The first was, never to receive any thing for true, but what I evidently
knew to be so; that's to say, Carefully to avoid Precipitation and
Prevention, and to admit nothing more into my judgment, but what should
so clearly and distinctly present it self to my minde, that I could have
no reason to doubt of it.

The second, to divide every One of these difficulties, which I was to
examine into as many parcels as could be, and, as was requisite the
better to resolve them.

The third, to lead my thoughts in order, beginning by the most simple
objects, and the easiest to be known; to rise by little and little, as
by steps, even to the knowledg of the most mixt; and even supposing an
Order among those which naturally doe not precede one the other.

And the last, to make every where such exact calculations, and such
generall reviews, That I might be confident to have omitted Nothing.

Those long chains of reasons, (though simple and easie) which the
Geometricians commonly use to lead us to their most difficult
demonstrations, gave me occasion to imagine, That all things which may
fall under the knowledg of Men, follow one the other in the same manner,
and so we doe only abstain from receiving any one for true, which is not
so, and observe alwayes the right order of deducing them one from the
other, there can be none so remote, to which at last we shall not
attain; nor so hid, which we shall not discover. Neither was I much
troubled to seek by which it behooved me to begin, for I already knew,
that it was by the most simple, and the easiest to be discern'd. But
considering, that amongst all those who formerly have sought the Truth
in Learning, none but the Mathematicians only could finde any
demonstrations, that's to say, any certain and evident reasons. I
doubted not, but that it was by the same that they have examin'd;
although I did hope for no other profit, but only that they would
accustome my Minde to nourish it self with Truths, and not content it
self with false Reasons. But for all this, I never intended to endevour
to learn all those particular Sciences which we commonly call'd
Mathematicall; And perceiving, that although their objects were
different, yet did they nevertheless agree altogether, in that they
consider no other thing, but the divers relations or proportions which
are found therein; I thought it therefore better to examine those
proportions in generall, and without supporting them but in those
subjects, which might the more easily serve to bring me to the knowledg
of them. But withall, without any wayes limiting them, That I might
afterwards the better sit them to all others whereto they might be
applyed. Having also observ'd, That to know them, it would be sometimes
needfull for me to consider every one in particular, or sometimes only
to restrain them, or comprehend many together; I thought, that to
consider them the better in particular I ought to suppose them in
lines, for as much as I find nothing more simple, nor which I could more
distinctly represent to my imagination, and to my sences; But to hold or
comprehend many in one, I was oblig'd to explain them by certain Cyphers
the shortest I possibly could, and that I should thereby borrow the best
of the Geometricall Analysis, and of Algebra, & so correct all the
defects of the one by the other.

As in effect I dare say, That the exact observation of those few
precepts I had chosen, gave me such a facility to resolve all the
questions whereto these two sciences extend; That in two or three months
space which I employed in the examination of them, having begun by the
most simple and most generall, and every Truth which I found being a
rule which afterwards served me to discover others; I did not only
compasse divers truths which I had formerly judged most difficult, But
me thought also that towards the end I could determin even in those
which I was ignorant of, by what means and how farr it was possible to
resolve them. Wherein perhaps I shall not appear to be very vain if you
consider, That there being but one truth of every thing, who ever finds
it, knows as much of it as one can know; And that for example a child
instructed in Arithmatick having made an addition according to his
rules, may be sure to have found, touching the sum he examined, all what
the wit of man could finde out. In a word the method which teacheth to
folow a right order, and exactly to enumerate all the circumstances of
what we seek, contains, whatsoever ascertains the rules of Arithmatick.


