All these considerations joyned together, were the cause three years
since why I would not divulge the Treatise I had in hand; and which is
more, that I resolved to publish none whilest I lived, which might be so
general, as that the Grounds of my Philosophy might be understood
thereby. But since, there hath been two other reasons have obliged me to
put forth some particular Essays, and to give the Publick some account
of my Actions and Designes. The first was, that if I failed therein,
divers who knew the intention I formerly had to print some of my
Writings, might imagine that the causes for which I forbore it, might
be more to my disadvantage then they are. For although I do not affect
glory in excess; or even, (if I may so speak) that I hate it, as far as
I judge it contrary to my rest, which I esteem above all things: Yet
also did I never seek to hide my actions as crimes, neither have I been
very wary to keep my self unknown; as well because I thought I might
wrong my self, as that it might in some manner disquiet me, which would
again have been contrary to the perfect repose of my minde which I seek.
And because having alwayes kept my self indifferent, caring not whether
I were known or no, I could not chuse but get some kinde of reputation,
I thought that I ought to do my best to hinder it at least from being
ill. The other reason which obliged me to write this, is, that observing
every day more and more the designe I have to instruct my self, retarded
by reason of an infinite number of experiments which are needful to me,
and which its impossible for me to make without the help of others;
although I do not so much flatter my self, as to hope that the Publick,
shares much in my concernments; yet will I not also be so much wanting
to my self, as to give any cause to those who shall survive me, to
reproach this, one day to me, That I could have left them divers things
far beyond what I have done, had I not too much neglected to make them
understand wherein they might contribute to my designe.

And I thought it easie for me to choose some matters, which being not
subject to many Controversies, nor obliging me to declare any more of my
Principles then I would willingly, would neverthelesse expresse clearly
enough, what my abilities or defects are in the Sciences. Wherein I
cannot say whether I have succeeded or no; neither will I prevent the
judgment of any man by speaking of my own Writings: but I should be
glad they might be examin'd; and to that end I beseech all those who
have any objections to make, to take the pains to send them to my
Stationer, that I being advertised by him, may endeavour at the same
time to adjoyn my Answer thereunto: and by that means, the Reader seeing
both the one and the other, may the more easily judge of the Truth. For
I promise, that I will never make any long Answers, but only very freely
confesse my own faults, if I find them; or if I cannot discover them,
plainly say what I shal think requisite in defence of what I have writ,
without adding the explanation of any new matter, that I may not
endlesly engage my self out of one into another.

Now if there be any whereof I have spoken in the beginning, of the
Opticks and of the Meteors, which at first jarr, by reason that I call
them Suppositions, and that I seem not willing to prove them; let a man
have but the patience to read the whole attentively, and I hope he will
rest satisfied: For (me thinks) the reasons follow each other so
closely, that as the later are demonstrated by the former, which are
their Causes; the former are reciprocally proved by the later, which are
their Effects. And no man can imagine that I herein commit the fault
which the Logicians call a _Circle_; for experience rendring the
greatest part of these effects most certain, the causes whence I deduce
them serve not so much to prove, as to explain them; but on the
contrary, they are those which are proved by them. Neither named I them
Suppositions, that it might be known that I conceive my self able to
deduce them from those first Truths which I have before discovered: But
that I would not expresly do it to crosse certain spirits, who imagine
that they know in a day al what another may have thought in twenty
yeers, as soon as he hath told them but two or three words; and who are
so much the more subject to erre, and less capable of the Truth, (as
they are more quick and penetrating) from taking occasion of erecting
some extravagant Philosophy on what they may beleeve to be my
Principles, and lest the fault should be attributed to me. For as for
those opinions which are wholly mine, I excuse them not as being new,
because that if the reasons of them be seriously considered, I assure my
self, they will be found so plain, and so agreeable to common sense,
that they will seem less extraordinary and strange then any other which
may be held on the same Subjects. Neither do I boast that I am the first
Inventor of any of them; but of this indeed, that I never admitted any
of them, neither because they had, or had not been said by others, but
only because Reason perswaded me to them.

If Mechanicks cannot so soon put in practise the Invention which is set
forth in the Opticks, I beleeve that therefore men ought not to condemn
it; forasmuch as skill and practice are necessary for the making and
compleating the Machines I have described; so that no circumstance
should be wanting. I should no less wonder if they should succeed at
first triall, then if a man should learn in a day to play excellently
well on a Lute, by having an exact piece set before him. And if I write
in French, which is the language of my Country, rather then in Latin,
which is that of my Tutors, 'tis because I hope such who use their meer
naturall reason, wil better judge of my opinions, then those who only
beleeve in old Books. And for those who joyn a right understanding with
study, (who I only wish for my Judges) I assure my self, they will not
be so partiall to the Latin, as to refuse to read my reasons because I
expresse them in a vulgar tongue.

To conclude, I will not speak here in particular of the progresse I
hoped to make hereafter in Learning; Nor engage my self by any promise
to the Publick, which I am not certain to perform. But I shall onely
say, That I am resolved to employ the remainder of my life in no other
thing but the study to acquire some such knowledge of Nature as may
furnish us with more certain rules in Physick then we hitherto have had:
And that my inclination drives me so strongly from all other kind of
designes, chiefly from those which cannot be profitable to any, but by
prejudicing others; that if any occasion obliged me to spend my time
therein, I should beleeve I should never succeed therein: which I here
declare, though I well know it conduceth not to make me considerable in
the world; neither is it my ambition to be so. And I shall esteem my
self always more obliged to those by whose favour I shal without
disturbance enjoy my ease, then to them who should proffer me the most
honourable imployment of the earth.


