But that I ought not any wayes to consent that they should be published
during my life; That neither the opposition and controversies, whereto
perhaps they might be obnoxious, nor even the reputation whatsoever it
were, which they might acquire me, might give me any occasion of
mispending the time I had design'd to employ for my instruction; for
although it be true that every Man is oblig'd to procure, as much as in
him lies, the good of others; and that to be profitable to no body, is
properly to be good for nothing: Yet it's as true, that our care ought
to reach beyond the present time; and that it were good to omit those
things which might perhaps conduce to the benefit of those who are
alive, when our designe is, to doe others which shall prove farr more
advantagious to our posterity; As indeed I desire it may be known that
the little I have learnt hitherto, is almost nothing in comparison of
what I am ignorant of; and I doe not despair to be able to learn: For
it's even the same with those, who by little and little discover the
truth in Learning; as with those who beginning to grow rich, are less
troubled to make great purchases, then they were before when they were
poorer, to make little ones. Or else one may compare them to Generals of
Armies, whose Forces usually encrease porportionably to their Victories;
and who have need of more conduct to maintain themselves after the loss
of a battail, then after the gaining one, to take Towns and Provinces.
For to endeavour to overcome all the difficulties and errours which
hinder us to come to the knowledg of the Truth, is truly to fight
battails. And to receive any false opinion touching a generall or
weighty matter, is as much as to lose one; there is far more dexterity
required to recover our former condition, then to make great progresses
where our Principles are already certain. For my part, if I formerly
have discovered some Truths in Learning, as I hope my Discourse will
make it appear I have, I may say, they are but the products and
dependances of five or six principall difficulties which I have
overcome, and which I reckon for so many won Battails on my side.
Neither will I forbear to say; That I think, It's only necessary for me
to win two or three more such, wholly to perfect my design. And that I
am not so old, but according to the ordinary course of Nature, I may
have time enough to effect it. But I beleeve I am so much the more
obliged to husband the rest of my time, as I have more hopes to employ
it well; without doubt, I should have divers occasions of impeding it,
should I publish the grounds of my Physicks. For although they are
almost all so evident, that to beleeve them, it's needfull onely to
understand them; and that there is none whereof I think my self unable
to give demonstration. Yet because it's impossible that they should
agree with all the severall opinions of other men, I foresee I should
often be diverted by the opposition they would occasion.

It may be objected, These oppositions might be profitable, as well to
make me know my faults, as if any thing of mine were good to make others
by that means come to a better understanding thereof; and as many may
see more then one man, beginning from this time to make use of my
grounds, they might also help me with their invention. But although I
know my self extremely subject to fail, and do never almost trust my
first thoughts; yet the experience I have of the objections which may be
made unto me, hinder me from hoping for any profit from them; For I have
often tried the judgments as well of those whom I esteem'd my friends,
as of others whom I thought indifferent, and even also of some, whose
malignity and envie did sufficiently discover what the affection of my
friends might hide. But it seldom happened that any thing was objected
against me, which I had not altogether foreseen, unless it were very
remote from my Subject: So that I never almost met with any Censurer of
my opinions, that seemed unto me either less rigorous, or less equitable
then my self. Neither did I ever observe, that by the disputations
practiced in the Schools any Truth which was formerly unknown, was ever
discovered. For whilest every one seeks to overcome, men strive more to
maintain probabilities, then to weigh the reasons on both sides; and
those who for a long time have been good Advocates, are not therefore
the better Judges afterwards.

As for the benefit which others may receive from the communication of my
thoughts, it cannot also be very great, forasmuch as I have not yet
perfected them, but that it is necessary to add many things thereunto,
before a usefull application can be made of them. And I think I may say
without vanity, That if there be any one capable thereof, it must be my
self, rather then any other. Not but that there may be divers wits in
the world incomparably better then mine; but because men cannot so well
conceive a thing and make it their own, when they learn it of another,
as when they invent it themselves: which is so true in this Subject,
that although I have often explain'd some of my opinions to very
understanding men, and who, whilest I spake to them, seem'd very
distinctly to conceive them; yet when they repeated them, I observ'd,
that they chang'd them almost always in such a manner, that I could no
longer own them for mine. Upon which occasion, I shall gladly here
desire those who come after me, never to beleeve those things which may
be delivered to them for mine, when I have not published them my self.
And I do not at all wonder at the extravagancies which are attributed to
all those ancient Philosophers, whose Writings we have not; neither do I
thereby judge, that their thoughts were very irrationall, seeing they
were the best Wits of their time; but onely that they have been ill
convey'd to us: as it appears also, that never any of their followers
surpass'd them. And I assure my self, that the most passionate of those,
who now follow _Aristotle_, would beleeve himself happy, had he but as
much knowledge of Nature as he had, although it were on condition that
he never might have more: They are like the ivie, which seeks to climb
no higher then the trees which support it, and ever after tends
downwards again when it hath attain'd to the height thereof: for, me
thinks also, that such men sink downwards; that is to say, render
themselves in some manner lesse knowing, then if they did abstain from
studying; who being not content to know all which is intelligibly set
down in their Authour, will besides that, finde out the solution of
divers difficulties of which he says nothing, and perhaps never thought
of them: yet their way of Philosophy is very fit for those who have but
mean capacities: For the obscurity of the distinctions and principles
which they use causeth them to speak of all things as boldly, as if they
knew them, and maintain all which they say, against the most subtill and
most able; so that there is no means left to convince them. Wherein they
seem like to a blinde man, who, to fight without disadvantage against
one that sees, should challenge him down into the bottom of a very dark
cellar: And I may say, that it is these mens interest, that I should
abstain from publishing the principles of the Philosophy I use, for
being most simple and most evident, as they are, I should even do the
same in publishing of them, as if I opened some windows, to let the day
into this cellar, into which they go down to fight. But even the best
Wits have no reason to wish for the knowledge of them: for if they will
be able to speak of all things, and acquire the reputation of being
learned, they will easily attain to it by contenting themselves with
probability, which without much trouble may be found in all kinde of
matters; then in seeking the Truth, which discovers it self but by
little and little, in some few things; and which, when we are to speak
of others, oblige us freely to confesse our ignorance of them. But if
they prefer the knowledge of some few truths to the vanity of seeming to
be ignorant of nothing, as without doubt they ought to do, and will
undertake a designe like mine, I need not tell them any more for this
purpose, but what I have already said in this Discourse: For if they
have a capacity to advance farther then I have done, they may with
greater consequence finde out of themselves whatsoever I think I have
found; Forasmuch as having never examined any thing but by order, it's
certain, that what remains yet for me to discover, is in it self more
difficult and more hid, then what I have already here before met with;
and they would receive much less satisfaction in learning it from me,
then from themselves. Besides that, the habit which they would get by
seeking first of all the easie things, and passing by degrees to others
more difficult, will be more usefull to them, then all my instructions.
As I for my part am perswaded, that had I been taught from my youth all
the Truths whose demonstrations I have discovered since, and had taken
no pains to learn them, perhaps I should never have known any other, or
at least, I should never have acquired that habit, and that faculty
which I think I have, still to finde out new ones, as I apply my self to
the search of them. And in a word, if there be in the world any work
which cannot be so well ended by any other, as by the same who began it,
it's that which I am now about.

