But that you might see how I treated this matter, I shall here present
you with the explication of the motion of the heart, and of the
arteries, which being the first and most general (which is observed in
animals) we may thereby easily judge what we ought to think of all the
rest. And that we may have the less difficulty to understand what I
shall say thereof, I wish those who are not versed in Anatomy, would
take the pains, before they read this, to cause the heart of some great
animal which hath lungs, to be dissected; for in all of them its very
like that of a Man: and that they may have shewn them the two cels or
concavities which are there: First that on the right side, whereto two
large conduits answer, to wit, the _vena cava_, which is the principal
receptacle of bloud, and as the body of a tree, whereof all the other
veins of the body are branches; and the arterious vein, which was so
mis-call'd, because that in effect its an artery, which taking its
_origine_ from the heart, divides it self after being come forth, into
divers branches, which every way spred themselves through the lungs.
Then the other which is on the left side, whereunto in the same manner
two pipes answer, which are as large, or larger then the former; to wit,
the veinous artery, which was also il named, forasmuch as its nothing
else but a vein which comes from the lungs, where its divided into
several branches interlaid with those of the arterious vein, and those
of that pipe which is called the Whistle, by which the breath enters.
And the great artery, which proceeding from the heart, disperseth its
branches thorow all the body. I would also that they would carefully
observe the eleven little skins, which, as so many little doors, open
and shut the four openings which are in these two concavities; to wit,
three at the entry of the _vena cava_, where they are so disposed, that
they can no wayes hinder the bloud which it contains from running into
the right concavity of the heart; and yet altogether hinder it from
coming out. Three at the entry of the arterious vein; which being
disposed quite contrary, permit only the bloud which is in that
concavity to pass to the lungs; but not that which is in the lungs to
return thither. And then two others at the entry of the veinous artery,
which permits the bloud to run to the left concavity of the heart, but
opposeth its return. And three at the entry of the great artery, which
permit it to go from the heart, but hinder its return thither. Neither
need we seek any other reason for the number of these skins, save only
that the opening of the veinous artery, being oval-wise, by reason of
its situation, may be fitly shut with two; whereas the other, being
round, may the better be clos'd with three. Besides, I would have them
consider, that the great artery and the arterious vein are of a
composition much stronger then the veinous artery or the _vena cava_.
And that these two later grow larger before they enter into the heart,
and make (as it were) two purses, call'd the ears of the heart, which
are composed of a flesh like it; and that there is always more heat in
the heart then in any other part of the body. And in fine, that if any
drop of bloud enter into these concavities, this heat is able to make it
presently swell and dilate it self, as generally all liquors do, when
drop by drop we let them fall into a very hot vessel.

For after this I need say no more for to unfold the motion of the
heart, but that when these concavities are not full of bloud,
necessarily there runs some from the _vena cava_ into the right, and
from the veinous artery into the left; for that these two vessels are
always full of it, and that their openings which are towards the heart
cannot then be shut: But that assoon as there is thus but two drops of
bloud entred, one in either of these concavities, these drops, which
cannot but be very big, by reason that their openings whereby they enter
are very large, and the vessels whence they come very full of bloud, are
rarified and dilated because of the heat which they find therein. By
means whereof, causing all the heart to swel, they drive and shut the
five little doors which are at the entry of the two vessels whence they
come, hindering thereby any more bloud to fall down into the heart, and
continuing more and more to rarifie themselves, they drive and open the
six other little doors which are at the entry of the other two vessels
whence they issue, causing by that means all the branches of the
arterious vein, and of the great artery, to swel (as it were) at the
same time with the heart: which presently after fals, as those arteries
also do, by reason that the bloud which is entred therein grows colder,
and their six little doors shut up again, and those five of the _vena
cava_, and of the veinous artery open again, and give way to two other
drops of bloud, which again swell the heart and the arteries in the same
manner as the preceding did. And because the bloud which thus enters
into the heart, passeth thorow those two purses, which are call'd the
ears; thence it comes, that their motion is contrary to the heart's, and
that they fall when that swels.


