The first was to obey the lawes and customes of my Country, constantly
adh√¶ring to that Religion wherein by the grace of God I had from mine
infancy bin bred. And in all other things behaving my self according to
the most moderate opinions and those which were farthest from excesse,
which were commonly received in practice by the most judicious Men,
amongst whom I was to live: For beginning from that very time, to reckon
mine own for nothing, because I could bring them all to the test, I was
confident I could not do better then follow those of the deepest sense;
and although perhaps there are as understanding men amongst the Persians
or Chineses as amongst us, yet I thought it was more fit to regulate my
self by those with whom I was to live, and that I might truly know what
their opinions were, I was rather to observe what they practic'd, then
what they taught. Not only by reason of the corruption of our manners,
there are but few who will say, all they beleeve, but also because
divers are themselves ignorant of it; for the act of the thought by
which we beleeve a thing, being different from that whereby we know that
we believe it, the one often is without the other. And amongst divers
opinions equally receiv'd, I made choise of the most moderate only, as
well because they are always the most fit for practice, and probably the
best, all excess being commonly ill; As also that I might less err from
the right way, if I should perhaps miss it, then if having chosen one of
the extremes, it might prove to be the other, which I should have
followed. And particularly I plac'd amongst extremities, all those
promises by which we somwhat restrain our liberty. Not that I
disapproved the laws, which to cure the inconstancy of weak minds,
permit us when we have any good design, or else for the preservation of
Commerce, one that is but indifferent, to make vows or contracts, which
oblige us to persevere in them: But because I saw nothing in the world
remain always in the same state; and forming own particular, promised my
self to perfect more and more my judgment, and not to impair it, I
should have thought my self guilty of a great fault against right
understanding, if because I then approved any thing, I were also
afterwards oblig'd to take it for good, when perhaps it ceased to be so,
or that I had ceased to esteem it so.

My second Maxime was, To be the most constant and resolute in my actions
that I could; and to follow with no less perseverance the most doubtfull
opinions, when I had once determined them, then if they had been the
most certain. Imitating herein Travellers, who having lost their way in
a Forrest, ought not to wander, turning now this way, and then that, and
less to abide in one place; but stil advance straight forwards, towards
one way, and not to change on slight occasions, although perhaps at
first Chance only mov'd them to determine that choice: For by that
means, if they do not go directly whither they desire, they will at
least arrive somewhere where they will probably be better then in the
midst of a Forrest. So the actions of this life admitting often of no
delay, its a most certain Truth, That when it is not in our power to
discern the truest opinions, we are to follow the most probable: Yea,
although we finde no more probability in the one then in the other, we
yet ought to determine some way, considering them afterwards no more as
doubtful in what they relate to practice; but as most true and certain;
forasmuch as the reason was so, which made us determine it. And this was
sufficient for that time to free me from all the remorse and repentance
which useth to perplex the consciences of those weak and staggering
minds, which inconstantly suffer themselves to passe to the practice of
those things as good, which they afterwards judge evill.

My third Maxime was, To endevour always rather to conquer my self then
Fortune; and to change my desires, rather then the order of the world:
and generally to accustome my self to beleeve, That there is nothing
wholly in our power but our thoughts; so that after we have done our
best, touching things which are without us, all whats wanting of success
in respect of us is absolutely impossible. And this alone seem'd
sufficient to hinder me from desiring any thing which I could not
acquire, and so to render me content. For our will naturally moving us
to desire nothing, but those things which our understanding presents in
some manner as possible, certain it is, that if we consider all the good
which is without us, as equally distant from our power, we should have
no more regret for the want of those which seem due to our births, when
without any fault of ours we shall be deprived of them, then we have in
wanting the possessions of the Kingdoms of _China_ or _Mexico_. And
making (as we say) vertue of necessity, we should no more desire to be
in health being sick, or free being in prison, then we now do, to have
bodies of as incorruptible a matter as diamonds, or wings to fly like
birds. But I confess, that a long exercise, and an often reiterated
meditation, is necessary to accustom us to look on all things with that
byass: And I beleeve, in this principally consists, the secret of those
Philosophers who formerly could snatch themselves from the Empire of
Fortune, and in spight of pains and poverty, dispute felicity with their
Gods, for imploying themselves incessantly in considering the bounds
which Nature had prescribed them, they so perfectly perswaded
themselves, That nothing was in their power but their thoughts, that,
that onely was enough to hinder them from having any affection for other
things. And they disposed so absolutely of them, that therein they had
some reason to esteem themselves more rich and powerfull, more free and
happy then any other men; who wanting this _Philosophy_, though they
were never so much favoured by Nature and Fortune, could never dispose
of all things so well as they desired.

Lastly, To conclude these Morals, I thought fit to make a review of mens
severall imployments in this life, that I might endeavour to make choice
of the best, and without prejudice to other mens, I thought I could not
do better then to continue in the same wherein I was, that is, to imploy
all my life in cultivating my Reason, and advancing my self, as far as I
could in the knowledge of Truth, following the Method I had prescribed
myself. I was sensible of such extreme contentment since I began to use
this Method, that I thought none could in this life be capable of any
more sweet and innocent: and daily discovering by means thereof, some
Truths which seemed to me of importance, and commonly such as other men
were ignorant of, the satisfaction I thereby received did so possesse my
minde, as if all things else concern'd me not. Besides, that the three
preceding Maximes were grounded only on the designe I had, to continue
the instruction of my self. For God having given to every one of us a
light to discern truth from falsehood, I could not beleeve I ought to
content my self one moment with the opinions of others, unlesse I had
proposed to my self in due time to imploy my judgment in the examination
of them. Neither could I have exempted my self from scruple in following
them, had I not hoped to lose no occasion of finding out better, if
there were any.


