This confusion of my thoughts kept me awake all night; but in the morning
I fell asleep; and having, by the amusement of my mind, been as it were
tired, and my spirits exhausted, I slept very soundly, and waked much
better composed than I had ever been before.  And now I began to think
sedately; and, upon debate with myself, I concluded that this island
(which was so exceedingly pleasant, fruitful, and no farther from the
mainland than as I had seen) was not so entirely abandoned as I might
imagine; that although there were no stated inhabitants who lived on the
spot, yet that there might sometimes come boats off from the shore, who,
either with design, or perhaps never but when they were driven by cross
winds, might come to this place; that I had lived there fifteen years now
and had not met with the least shadow or figure of any people yet; and
that, if at any time they should be driven here, it was probable they
went away again as soon as ever they could, seeing they had never thought
fit to fix here upon any occasion; that the most I could suggest any
danger from was from any casual accidental landing of straggling people
from the main, who, as it was likely, if they were driven hither, were
here against their wills, so they made no stay here, but went off again
with all possible speed; seldom staying one night on shore, lest they
should not have the help of the tides and daylight back again; and that,
therefore, I had nothing to do but to consider of some safe retreat, in
case I should see any savages land upon the spot.

Now, I began sorely to repent that I had dug my cave so large as to bring
a door through again, which door, as I said, came out beyond where my
fortification joined to the rock: upon maturely considering this,
therefore, I resolved to draw me a second fortification, in the manner of
a semicircle, at a distance from my wall, just where I had planted a
double row of trees about twelve years before, of which I made mention:
these trees having been planted so thick before, they wanted but few
piles to be driven between them, that they might be thicker and stronger,
and my wall would be soon finished.  So that I had now a double wall; and
my outer wall was thickened with pieces of timber, old cables, and
everything I could think of, to make it strong; having in it seven little
holes, about as big as I might put my arm out at.  In the inside of this
I thickened my wall to about ten feet thick with continually bringing
earth out of my cave, and laying it at the foot of the wall, and walking
upon it; and through the seven holes I contrived to plant the muskets, of
which I took notice that I had got seven on shore out of the ship; these
I planted like my cannon, and fitted them into frames, that held them
like a carriage, so that I could fire all the seven guns in two minutes’
time; this wall I was many a weary month in finishing, and yet never
thought myself safe till it was done.

When this was done I stuck all the ground without my wall, for a great
length every way, as full with stakes or sticks of the osier-like wood,
which I found so apt to grow, as they could well stand; insomuch that I
believe I might set in near twenty thousand of them, leaving a pretty
large space between them and my wall, that I might have room to see an
enemy, and they might have no shelter from the young trees, if they
attempted to approach my outer wall.

Thus in two years’ time I had a thick grove; and in five or six years’
time I had a wood before my dwelling, growing so monstrously thick and
strong that it was indeed perfectly impassable: and no men, of what kind
soever, could ever imagine that there was anything beyond it, much less a
habitation.  As for the way which I proposed to myself to go in and out
(for I left no avenue), it was by setting two ladders, one to a part of
the rock which was low, and then broke in, and left room to place another
ladder upon that; so when the two ladders were taken down no man living
could come down to me without doing himself mischief; and if they had
come down, they were still on the outside of my outer wall.

Thus I took all the measures human prudence could suggest for my own
preservation; and it will be seen at length that they were not altogether
without just reason; though I foresaw nothing at that time more than my
mere fear suggested to me.


