During this time I made my rounds in the woods for game every day when
the rain permitted me, and made frequent discoveries in these walks of
something or other to my advantage; particularly, I found a kind of wild
pigeons, which build, not as wood-pigeons in a tree, but rather as
house-pigeons, in the holes of the rocks; and taking some young ones, I
endeavoured to breed them up tame, and did so; but when they grew older
they flew away, which perhaps was at first for want of feeding them, for
I had nothing to give them; however, I frequently found their nests, and
got their young ones, which were very good meat.  And now, in the
managing my household affairs, I found myself wanting in many things,
which I thought at first it was impossible for me to make; as, indeed,
with some of them it was: for instance, I could never make a cask to be
hooped.  I had a small runlet or two, as I observed before; but I could
never arrive at the capacity of making one by them, though I spent many
weeks about it; I could neither put in the heads, or join the staves so
true to one another as to make them hold water; so I gave that also over.
In the next place, I was at a great loss for candles; so that as soon as
ever it was dark, which was generally by seven o’clock, I was obliged to
go to bed.  I remembered the lump of beeswax with which I made candles in
my African adventure; but I had none of that now; the only remedy I had
was, that when I had killed a goat I saved the tallow, and with a little
dish made of clay, which I baked in the sun, to which I added a wick of
some oakum, I made me a lamp; and this gave me light, though not a clear,
steady light, like a candle.  In the middle of all my labours it happened
that, rummaging my things, I found a little bag which, as I hinted
before, had been filled with corn for the feeding of poultry—not for this
voyage, but before, as I suppose, when the ship came from Lisbon.  The
little remainder of corn that had been in the bag was all devoured by the
rats, and I saw nothing in the bag but husks and dust; and being willing
to have the bag for some other use (I think it was to put powder in, when
I divided it for fear of the lightning, or some such use), I shook the
husks of corn out of it on one side of my fortification, under the rock.

It was a little before the great rains just now mentioned that I threw
this stuff away, taking no notice, and not so much as remembering that I
had thrown anything there, when, about a month after, or thereabouts, I
saw some few stalks of something green shooting out of the ground, which
I fancied might be some plant I had not seen; but I was surprised, and
perfectly astonished, when, after a little longer time, I saw about ten
or twelve ears come out, which were perfect green barley, of the same
kind as our European—nay, as our English barley.

It is impossible to express the astonishment and confusion of my thoughts
on this occasion.  I had hitherto acted upon no religious foundation at
all; indeed, I had very few notions of religion in my head, nor had
entertained any sense of anything that had befallen me otherwise than as
chance, or, as we lightly say, what pleases God, without so much as
inquiring into the end of Providence in these things, or His order in
governing events for the world.  But after I saw barley grow there, in a
climate which I knew was not proper for corn, and especially that I knew
not how it came there, it startled me strangely, and I began to suggest
that God had miraculously caused His grain to grow without any help of
seed sown, and that it was so directed purely for my sustenance on that
wild, miserable place.

This touched my heart a little, and brought tears out of my eyes, and I
began to bless myself that such a prodigy of nature should happen upon my
account; and this was the more strange to me, because I saw near it
still, all along by the side of the rock, some other straggling stalks,
which proved to be stalks of rice, and which I knew, because I had seen
it grow in Africa when I was ashore there.

I not only thought these the pure productions of Providence for my
support, but not doubting that there was more in the place, I went all
over that part of the island, where I had been before, peering in every
corner, and under every rock, to see for more of it, but I could not find
any.  At last it occurred to my thoughts that I shook a bag of chickens’
meat out in that place; and then the wonder began to cease; and I must
confess my religious thankfulness to God’s providence began to abate,
too, upon the discovering that all this was nothing but what was common;
though I ought to have been as thankful for so strange and unforeseen a
providence as if it had been miraculous; for it was really the work of
Providence to me, that should order or appoint that ten or twelve grains
of corn should remain unspoiled, when the rats had destroyed all the
rest, as if it had been dropped from heaven; as also, that I should throw
it out in that particular place, where, it being in the shade of a high
rock, it sprang up immediately; whereas, if I had thrown it anywhere else
at that time, it had been burnt up and destroyed.

I carefully saved the ears of this corn, you may be sure, in their
season, which was about the end of June; and, laying up every corn, I
resolved to sow them all again, hoping in time to have some quantity
sufficient to supply me with bread.  But it was not till the fourth year
that I could allow myself the least grain of this corn to eat, and even
then but sparingly, as I shall say afterwards, in its order; for I lost
all that I sowed the first season by not observing the proper time; for I
sowed it just before the dry season, so that it never came up at all, at
least not as it would have done; of which in its place.

Besides this barley, there were, as above, twenty or thirty stalks of
rice, which I preserved with the same care and for the same use, or to
the same purpose—to make me bread, or rather food; for I found ways to
cook it without baking, though I did that also after some time.

But to return to my Journal.


