In a little time, however, no more canoes appearing, the fear of their
coming wore off; and I began to take my former thoughts of a voyage to
the main into consideration; being likewise assured by Friday’s father
that I might depend upon good usage from their nation, on his account, if
I would go.  But my thoughts were a little suspended when I had a serious
discourse with the Spaniard, and when I understood that there were
sixteen more of his countrymen and Portuguese, who having been cast away
and made their escape to that side, lived there at peace, indeed, with
the savages, but were very sore put to it for necessaries, and, indeed,
for life.  I asked him all the particulars of their voyage, and found
they were a Spanish ship, bound from the Rio de la Plata to the Havanna,
being directed to leave their loading there, which was chiefly hides and
silver, and to bring back what European goods they could meet with there;
that they had five Portuguese seamen on board, whom they took out of
another wreck; that five of their own men were drowned when first the
ship was lost, and that these escaped through infinite dangers and
hazards, and arrived, almost starved, on the cannibal coast, where they
expected to have been devoured every moment.  He told me they had some
arms with them, but they were perfectly useless, for that they had
neither powder nor ball, the washing of the sea having spoiled all their
powder but a little, which they used at their first landing to provide
themselves with some food.

I asked him what he thought would become of them there, and if they had
formed any design of making their escape.  He said they had many
consultations about it; but that having neither vessel nor tools to build
one, nor provisions of any kind, their councils always ended in tears and
despair.  I asked him how he thought they would receive a proposal from
me, which might tend towards an escape; and whether, if they were all
here, it might not be done.  I told him with freedom, I feared mostly
their treachery and ill-usage of me, if I put my life in their hands; for
that gratitude was no inherent virtue in the nature of man, nor did men
always square their dealings by the obligations they had received so much
as they did by the advantages they expected.  I told him it would be very
hard that I should be made the instrument of their deliverance, and that
they should afterwards make me their prisoner in New Spain, where an
Englishman was certain to be made a sacrifice, what necessity or what
accident soever brought him thither; and that I had rather be delivered
up to the savages, and be devoured alive, than fall into the merciless
claws of the priests, and be carried into the Inquisition.  I added that,
otherwise, I was persuaded, if they were all here, we might, with so many
hands, build a barque large enough to carry us all away, either to the
Brazils southward, or to the islands or Spanish coast northward; but that
if, in requital, they should, when I had put weapons into their hands,
carry me by force among their own people, I might be ill-used for my
kindness to them, and make my case worse than it was before.

He answered, with a great deal of candour and ingenuousness, that their
condition was so miserable, and that they were so sensible of it, that he
believed they would abhor the thought of using any man unkindly that
should contribute to their deliverance; and that, if I pleased, he would
go to them with the old man, and discourse with them about it, and return
again and bring me their answer; that he would make conditions with them
upon their solemn oath, that they should be absolutely under my direction
as their commander and captain; and they should swear upon the holy
sacraments and gospel to be true to me, and go to such Christian country
as I should agree to, and no other; and to be directed wholly and
absolutely by my orders till they were landed safely in such country as I
intended, and that he would bring a contract from them, under their
hands, for that purpose.  Then he told me he would first swear to me
himself that he would never stir from me as long as he lived till I gave
him orders; and that he would take my side to the last drop of his blood,
if there should happen the least breach of faith among his countrymen.
He told me they were all of them very civil, honest men, and they were
under the greatest distress imaginable, having neither weapons nor
clothes, nor any food, but at the mercy and discretion of the savages;
out of all hopes of ever returning to their own country; and that he was
sure, if I would undertake their relief, they would live and die by me.

Upon these assurances, I resolved to venture to relieve them, if
possible, and to send the old savage and this Spaniard over to them to
treat.  But when we had got all things in readiness to go, the Spaniard
himself started an objection, which had so much prudence in it on one
hand, and so much sincerity on the other hand, that I could not but be
very well satisfied in it; and, by his advice, put off the deliverance of
his comrades for at least half a year.  The case was thus: he had been
with us now about a month, during which time I had let him see in what
manner I had provided, with the assistance of Providence, for my support;
and he saw evidently what stock of corn and rice I had laid up; which,
though it was more than sufficient for myself, yet it was not sufficient,
without good husbandry, for my family, now it was increased to four; but
much less would it be sufficient if his countrymen, who were, as he said,
sixteen, still alive, should come over; and least of all would it be
sufficient to victual our vessel, if we should build one, for a voyage to
any of the Christian colonies of America; so he told me he thought it
would be more advisable to let him and the other two dig and cultivate
some more land, as much as I could spare seed to sow, and that we should
wait another harvest, that we might have a supply of corn for his
countrymen, when they should come; for want might be a temptation to them
to disagree, or not to think themselves delivered, otherwise than out of
one difficulty into another.  “You know,” says he, “the children of
Israel, though they rejoiced at first for their being delivered out of
Egypt, yet rebelled even against God Himself, that delivered them, when
they came to want bread in the wilderness.”

His caution was so seasonable, and his advice so good, that I could not
but be very well pleased with his proposal, as well as I was satisfied
with his fidelity; so we fell to digging, all four of us, as well as the
wooden tools we were furnished with permitted; and in about a month’s
time, by the end of which it was seed-time, we had got as much land cured
and trimmed up as we sowed two-and-twenty bushels of barley on, and
sixteen jars of rice, which was, in short, all the seed we had to spare:
indeed, we left ourselves barely sufficient, for our own food for the six
months that we had to expect our crop; that is to say reckoning from the
time we set our seed aside for sowing; for it is not to be supposed it is
six months in the ground in that country.

Having now society enough, and our numbers being sufficient to put us out
of fear of the savages, if they had come, unless their number had been
very great, we went freely all over the island, whenever we found
occasion; and as we had our escape or deliverance upon our thoughts, it
was impossible, at least for me, to have the means of it out of mine.
For this purpose I marked out several trees, which I thought fit for our
work, and I set Friday and his father to cut them down; and then I caused
the Spaniard, to whom I imparted my thoughts on that affair, to oversee
and direct their work.  I showed them with what indefatigable pains I had
hewed a large tree into single planks, and I caused them to do the like,
till they made about a dozen large planks, of good oak, near two feet
broad, thirty-five feet long, and from two inches to four inches thick:
what prodigious labour it took up any one may imagine.

At the same time I contrived to increase my little flock of tame goats as
much as I could; and for this purpose I made Friday and the Spaniard go
out one day, and myself with Friday the next day (for we took our turns),
and by this means we got about twenty young kids to breed up with the
rest; for whenever we shot the dam, we saved the kids, and added them to
our flock.  But above all, the season for curing the grapes coming on, I
caused such a prodigious quantity to be hung up in the sun, that, I
believe, had we been at Alicant, where the raisins of the sun are cured,
we could have filled sixty or eighty barrels; and these, with our bread,
formed a great part of our food—very good living too, I assure you, for
they are exceedingly nourishing.

It was now harvest, and our crop in good order: it was not the most
plentiful increase I had seen in the island, but, however, it was enough
to answer our end; for from twenty-two bushels of barley we brought in
and thrashed out above two hundred and twenty bushels; and the like in
proportion of the rice; which was store enough for our food to the next
harvest, though all the sixteen Spaniards had been on shore with me; or,
if we had been ready for a voyage, it would very plentifully have
victualled our ship to have carried us to any part of the world; that is
to say, any part of America.  When we had thus housed and secured our
magazine of corn, we fell to work to make more wicker-ware, viz. great
baskets, in which we kept it; and the Spaniard was very handy and
dexterous at this part, and often blamed me that I did not make some
things for defence of this kind of work; but I saw no need of it.

And now, having a full supply of food for all the guests I expected, I
gave the Spaniard leave to go over to the main, to see what he could do
with those he had left behind him there.  I gave him a strict charge not
to bring any man who would not first swear in the presence of himself and
the old savage that he would in no way injure, fight with, or attack the
person he should find in the island, who was so kind as to send for them
in order to their deliverance; but that they would stand by him and
defend him against all such attempts, and wherever they went would be
entirely under and subjected to his command; and that this should be put
in writing, and signed in their hands.  How they were to have done this,
when I knew they had neither pen nor ink, was a question which we never
asked.  Under these instructions, the Spaniard and the old savage, the
father of Friday, went away in one of the canoes which they might be said
to have come in, or rather were brought in, when they came as prisoners
to be devoured by the savages.  I gave each of them a musket, with a
firelock on it, and about eight charges of powder and ball, charging them
to be very good husbands of both, and not to use either of them but upon
urgent occasions.

This was a cheerful work, being the first measures used by me in view of
my deliverance for now twenty-seven years and some days.  I gave them
provisions of bread and of dried grapes, sufficient for themselves for
many days, and sufficient for all the Spaniards—for about eight days’
time; and wishing them a good voyage, I saw them go, agreeing with them
about a signal they should hang out at their return, by which I should
know them again when they came back, at a distance, before they came on
shore.  They went away with a fair gale on the day that the moon was at
full, by my account in the month of October; but as for an exact
reckoning of days, after I had once lost it I could never recover it
again; nor had I kept even the number of years so punctually as to be
sure I was right; though, as it proved when I afterwards examined my
account, I found I had kept a true reckoning of years.

It was no less than eight days I had waited for them, when a strange and
unforeseen accident intervened, of which the like has not, perhaps, been
heard of in history.  I was fast asleep in my hutch one morning, when my
man Friday came running in to me, and called aloud, “Master, master, they
are come, they are come!”  I jumped up, and regardless of danger I went,
as soon as I could get my clothes on, through my little grove, which, by
the way, was by this time grown to be a very thick wood; I say,
regardless of danger I went without my arms, which was not my custom to
do; but I was surprised when, turning my eyes to the sea, I presently saw
a boat at about a league and a half distance, standing in for the shore,
with a shoulder-of-mutton sail, as they call it, and the wind blowing
pretty fair to bring them in: also I observed, presently, that they did
not come from that side which the shore lay on, but from the southernmost
end of the island.  Upon this I called Friday in, and bade him lie close,
for these were not the people we looked for, and that we might not know
yet whether they were friends or enemies.  In the next place I went in to
fetch my perspective glass to see what I could make of them; and having
taken the ladder out, I climbed up to the top of the hill, as I used to
do when I was apprehensive of anything, and to take my view the plainer
without being discovered.  I had scarce set my foot upon the hill when my
eye plainly discovered a ship lying at anchor, at about two leagues and a
half distance from me, SSE., but not above a league and a half from the
shore.  By my observation it appeared plainly to be an English ship, and
the boat appeared to be an English long-boat.


