When they came by the ship's side which I commanded we hailed them in the
usual manner, to know what and who they were, and what their business. They
answered they were Englishmen, and desired to come on board. We told them
they might lay the ship on board, but ordered they should let only one man
enter the ship till the captain knew their business, and that he should
come without any arms. They said, Ay, with all their hearts.

We presently found their business, and that they desired to go with us; and
as for their arms, they desired we would send men on board the boat, and
that they would deliver them all to us, which was done. The fellow that
came up to me told me how they had been used by their captain, how he had
starved the men, and used them like dogs, and that, if the rest of the men
knew they should be admitted, he was satisfied two-thirds of them would
leave the ship. We found the fellows were very hearty in their resolution,
and jolly brisk sailors they were; so I told them I would do nothing
without our admiral, that was the captain of the other ship; so I sent my
pinnace on board Captain Wilmot, to desire him to come on board. But he was
indisposed, and being to leeward, excused his coming, but left it all to
me; but before my boat was returned, Captain Wilmot called to me by his
speaking-trumpet, which all the men might hear as well as I; thus, calling
me by my name, "I hear they are honest fellows; pray tell them they are all
welcome, and make them a bowl of punch."

As the men heard it as well as I, there was no need to tell them what the
captain said; and, as soon as the trumpet had done, they set up a huzza,
that showed us they were very hearty in their coming to us; but we bound
them to us by a stronger obligation still after this, for when we came to
Madagascar, Captain Wilmot, with consent of all the ship's company, ordered
that these men should have as much money given them out of the stock as was
due to them for their pay in the ship they had left; and after that we
allowed them twenty pieces of eight a man bounty money; and thus we entered
them upon shares, as we were all, and brave stout fellows they were, being
eighteen in number, whereof two were midshipmen, and one a carpenter.

It was the 28th of November, when, having had some bad weather, we came to
an anchor in the road off St Augustine Bay, at the south-west end of my old
acquaintance the isle of Madagascar. We lay here awhile and trafficked with
the natives for some good beef; though the weather was so hot that we could
not promise ourselves to salt any of it up to keep; but I showed them the
way which we practised before, to salt it first with saltpetre, then cure
it by drying it in the sun, which made it eat very agreeably, though not so
wholesome for our men, that not agreeing with our way of cooking, viz.,
boiling with pudding, brewis, &c., and particularly this way, would be too
salt, and the fat of the meat be rusty, or dried away so as not to be
eaten.

This, however, we could not help, and made ourselves amends by feeding
heartily on the fresh beef while we were there, which was excellent, good
and fat, every way as tender and as well relished as in England, and
thought to be much better to us who had not tasted any in England for so
long a time.

Having now for some time remained here, we began to consider that this was
not a place for our business; and I, that had some views a particular way
of my own, told them that this was not a station for those who looked for
purchase; that there were two parts of the island which were particularly
proper for our purposes; first, the bay on the east side of the island, and
from thence to the island Mauritius, which was the usual way which ships
that came from the Malabar coast, or the coast of Coromandel, Fort St
George, &c., used to take, and where, if we waited for them, we ought to
take our station.

But, on the other hand, as we did not resolve to fall upon the European
traders, who were generally ships of force and well manned, and where blows
must be looked for; so I had another prospect, which I promised myself
would yield equal profit, or perhaps greater, without any of the hazard and
difficulty of the former; and this was the Gulf of Mocha, or the Red Sea.

I told them that the trade here was great, the ships rich, and the Strait
of Babelmandel narrow; so that there was no doubt but we might cruise so as
to let nothing slip our hands, having the seas open from the Red Sea, along
the coast of Arabia, to the Persian Gulf, and the Malabar side of the
Indies.

I told them what I had observed when I sailed round the island in my former
progress; how that, on the northernmost point of the island, there were
several very good harbours and roads for our ships; that the natives were
even more civil and tractable, if possible, than those where we were, not
having been so often ill-treated by European sailors as those had in the
south and east sides; and that we might always be sure of a retreat, if we
were driven to put in by any necessity, either of enemies or weather.

They were easily convinced of the reasonableness of my scheme; and Captain
Wilmot, whom I now called our admiral, though he was at first of the mind
to go and lie at the island Mauritius, and wait for some of the European
merchant-ships from the road of Coromandel, or the Bay of Bengal, was now
of my mind. It is true we were strong enough to have attacked an English
East India ship of the greatest force, though some of them were said to
carry fifty guns; but I represented to him that we were sure to have blows
and blood if we took them; and, after we had done, their loading was not of
equal value to us, because we had no room to dispose of their merchandise;
and, as our circumstances stood, we had rather have taken one outward-bound
East India ship, with her ready cash on board, perhaps to the value of
forty or fifty thousand pounds, than three homeward-bound, though their
loading would at London be worth three times the money, because we knew not
whither to go to dispose of the cargo; whereas the ships from London had
abundance of things we knew how to make use of besides their money, such as
their stores of provisions and liquors, and great quantities of the like
sent to the governors and factories at the English settlements for their
use; so that, if we resolved to look for our own country ships, it should
be those that were outward-bound, not the London ships homeward.

All these things considered, brought the admiral to be of my mind entirely;
so, after taking in water and some fresh provisions where we lay, which was
near Cape St Mary, on the south-west corner of the island, we weighed and
stood away south, and afterwards S.S.E., to round the island, and in about
six days' sail got out of the wake of the island, and steered away north,
till we came off Port Dauphin, and then north by east, to the latitude of
13 degrees 40 minutes, which was, in short, just at the farthest part of
the island; and the admiral, keeping ahead, made the open sea fair to the
west, clear of the whole island; upon which he brought to, and we sent a
sloop to stand in round the farthest point north, and coast along the
shore, and see for a harbour to put into, which they did, and soon brought
us an account that there was a deep bay, with a very good road, and several
little islands, under which they found good riding, in ten to seventeen
fathom water, and accordingly there we put in.


